Title: Cross-Layer Misalignment Detection in Agent Skills: A Progressive Loading-Aware Contrastive Learning Approach

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.10534v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Jul 2026 02:13:03 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# Cross-Layer Misalignment Detection in Agent Skills: A Progressive Loading-Aware Contrastive Learning Approach 

# Chengjun Zhang 

cz1@iu.edu Indiana University Bloomington Bloomington, Indiana, USA 

# Yang Gao 

gaoyang@iu.edu Indiana University Bloomington Bloomington, Indiana, USA 

# Jianna Hur 

jhur06@iu.edu Indiana University Bloomington Bloomington, Indiana, USA 

# Jingjing Zhang 

jjzhang@iu.edu Indiana University Bloomington Bloomington, Indiana, USA 

# Sagar Samtani 

ssamtani@iu.edu Indiana University Bloomington Bloomington, Indiana, USA 

## Abstract 

Large language model (LLM) agents are increasingly extended through Agent Skills, reusable artifacts that package natural-language metadata, procedural instructions, and execution-time resources for runtime use. As open-source skill marketplaces expand, users and agents increasingly rely on brief metadata to select third-party skills, making it difficult to detect inconsistencies between a skill’s description and its true behavior, a problem we call cross-layer mis-alignment . To address this issue, we propose Progressive Loading-Aware Hierarchical Contrastive Learning (PL-HCL) , an LLM-based framework that detects misalignment by modeling the lay-ered structure of Agent Skills and learning cross-layer consistency. Using a normalized corpus of over 264,000 open-source skills and a human-verified challenge set, PL-HCL improves Macro-F1 from approximately 0.45 for unadapted baselines to 0.87–0.89 across evaluated LLM backbones. This approach offers an effective screen-ing tool for users and operators, as well as design principles for detecting inconsistencies in layered digital artifacts. 

## Keywords 

Agent Skills, agentic AI, trustworthiness, cross-layer misalignment, contrastive learning, continued pretraining 

## 1 Introduction 

Large Language Models (LLMs) are evolving from single-turn text generators into agentic Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems capa-ble of reasoning, tool use, and interaction with external environ-ments [ 24 , 32 ]. Agent Skills have become essential supply-side components of agentic AI systems to extend an agent’s capabili-ties [ 1 , 17 ]. Agent Skills encapsulate reusable procedural knowledge into loadable modules, which typically include natural language instructions, scripts, and resources to support specific tasks or work-flows [1]. In contrast to standard prompts or standalone tools, Agent Skills are hierarchical artifacts in which a surface metadata layer sits above layers of instructions, code, files, and executables. Users and agents access metadata before progressively accessing deeper components. This progressive loading mechanism introduces the risk that the metadata used for skill selection may not correspond to the behaviors actually supported or enabled by the underly-ing components [ 6, 7, 33 ]. For example, a skill may claim in its metadata to be a harmless productivity assistant while containing prompt injection, credential leakage, data exfiltration, or insecure command execution within its instruction or script layers [ 18 , 19 ]. Conversely, a skill may claim to support a specific capability in its description, yet fail to implement it within its instructions or resources. This reflects a broader documentation-implementation consistency problem, where natural-language descriptions can di-verge from the executable or procedural artifacts they are intended to summarize [ 20 , 28 , 36 ]. In Agent Skill packages, such inconsis-tency can be described as cross-layer misalignment. In this case, user-facing claims may diverge from the behaviors supported, re-quested, or enabled by the underlying instructions, resources, and executable components. This mismatch warrants attention because trust decisions re-garding Agent Skills are frequently made before the package is fully inspected or executed. Marketplace descriptions, repository metadata, and skill names influence the selection process. How-ever, the underlying instruction and resource layers that dictate behavior may not be accessible until later loading or execution stages. Consequently, the trustworthiness of Agent Skills cannot be assessed solely by examining the security of a single layer or by evaluating task success rates after execution. Past research has shown that agent and skill evaluation often focuses either on se-curity vulnerabilities in specific artifacts or on downstream task performance, while cross-layer consistency between surface claims and deeper package evidence remains a distinct evaluation tar-get [ 6, 9, 17 , 18 , 21 ]. Instead, it is necessary to determine whether a consistent behavioral contract exists across the different layers prior to execution. Current evaluations of agentic AI focus primarily on runtime performance, including task success rates, reasoning-action trajec-tories, web browsing, multimodal reasoning, or tool proficiency [ 21 ,32 ]. Although these paradigms are essential for understanding the execution process, they generally assume that the relevant tools or skills have already been selected and loaded [ 6, 9 , 17 , 21 ]. The key question is whether the components within a skill package are internally consistent prior to execution. This “pre-execution" setting requires the model to compare heterogeneous forms of evi-dence, specifically metadata, instructions, and resources. Although general LLMs or cybersecurity LLMs may detect suspicious text or code patterns, they have not been explicitly trained to verify whether high-level claims are genuinely supported by the evidence arXiv:2607.10534v1 [cs.AI] 12 Jul 2026 Chengjun Zhang, Yang Gao, Jianna Hur, Jingjing Zhang, and Sagar Samtani 

contained in the underlying package components. In light of these issues, we propose a Progressive Loading-Aware Hierarchical Con-trastive Learning (PL-HCL) framework that aims to evaluate cross-layer misalignment in Agent Skills before execution. PL-HCL treats each skill package as a layered artifact consisting of metadata, in-structions, and resources, and trains the model to learn whether user-facing claims are supported by deeper package evidence. The framework integrates two key components: (1) A two-stage continued pretraining process that adapts base LLMs to the vocabulary, formatting, and progressive struc-ture of Agent Skill packages. The first stage trains on short metadata-instruction views, and the second stage trains on full package views that include resources. (2) A progressive loading-aware hierarchical contrastive learn-ing process learns cross-layer consistency by contrasting aligned same-skill layers with metadata-swapped and cor-rupted variants. This design directly targets the mismatch between surface claims and deeper behavioral evidence. This paper makes several key contributions. First, we construct a large-scale open-source Agent Skill corpus and a human-verified challenge set for aligned/misaligned skill evaluation, enabling sys-tematic study of skill-level trustworthiness before execution. Sec-ond, we introduce PL-HCL, a contrastive pretraining framework that learns cross-layer consistency from aligned packages and syn-thetic pairs. Finally, we evaluate base LLMs, two-stage continued pretraining, and PL-HCL across general and cybersecurity back-bones to demonstrate that skill-format adaptation alone is insuffi-cient while explicit cross-layer contrastive learning substantially improves misaligned-class detection. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We first review prior work on Agent Skill security, continued pretraining and curriculum adaptation, and contrastive learning for hierarchical and multi-view representations. Second, we identify research gaps and present the research questions for this study. Third, we define cross-layer misalignment and describe the dataset. We then present the PL-HCL framework and report the experimental results. Finally, we discuss implications for trustworthy Agent Skill evaluation and conclude with limitations and future directions. 

## 2 Related Work 

This section reviews three streams of related research that moti-vate and ground our problem formulation and proposed method: 1) work on tool-augmented agents and Agent Skill security ex-plains why reusable skill components create a new trustworthiness surface for agentic AI; 2) continued pretraining and curricu-lum adaptation motivate our use of staged skill-format adaptation before contrastive learning, and 3) contrastive and hierarchical representation learning provide the methodological foundation for learning cross-layer consistency within agent skills. 

## 2.1 Tool-Augmented Agents and Agent Skill Security 

2.1.1 Tool-Augmented Agent Evaluation. Research on tool-augmented agents explores how LLMs extend their reasoning and task-completion capabilities through external tools, APIs, and environment actions. For example, ReAct demonstrated an agent pattern that interleaves reasoning traces with actions, enabling LLMs to invoke external information or tools during task execution [ 32 ]. Toolformer fur-ther investigated how LLMs can learn to call APIs at appropriate junctures, thereby integrating tool use into model behavior [ 24 ]. As agent systems shift from isolated text generation to external interaction, evaluation has increasingly focused on agent perfor-mance in complex task environments. GAIA evaluates the task-completion capabilities of general AI assistants in dimensions such as reasoning, web browsing, multimodal understanding, and tool-use proficiency [ 21 ]. Recent red-teaming work further shows that autonomous agents equipped with persistent memory, communica-tion channels, file-system access, or shell execution can produce failures that involve security, privacy, and governance risks. These risks include information disclosure, destructive actions, identity spoofing, and partial system takeover [ 26 ]. Such research demon-strates that evaluating agentic AI requires attention not only to the quality of the final answer but also to the broader trustworthi-ness risks arising from the interaction between agents and external capabilities. Therefore, we review the characteristics of Agent Skill. 

2.1.2 Agent Skills as Reusable Evaluation Artifacts. As indicated in the introduction, Agent Skills encapsulate procedural knowledge into reusable packages, enabling agents to load task-specific capa-bilities at inference time [ 1, 17 ]. Unlike a single API endpoint or function call, Agent Skill packages typically comprise marketplace metadata, natural-language instructions, scripts, configuration files, dependencies, and resources [ 1]. Thus, Agent Skills are not merely external interfaces invoked by agents. Instead, skills are structured artifacts containing claims, instructions, and executable or resource-based evidence. Recent work has begun to investigate Agent Skills as independent objects of evaluation. For example, SkillsBench examines whether curated or self-generated skills enhance agent performance across tasks, finding that curated skills increase av-erage pass rates, but their effectiveness depends on the domain and task [ 17 ]. Such benchmarks isolate agent skills from general tool-use settings and emphasize the impact of the skill package itself on agent performance. For skill-based agent ecosystems, this demonstrates that reusable skill packages are both auxiliary mate-rials and evaluation artifacts capable of substantially altering agent behavior and task outcomes. 

2.1.3 Security and Trustworthiness Risks in Agent Skills. As Agent Skills are increasingly used to extend agent capabilities, security studies have begun to systematically analyze their risks. Liu et al. [ 18 ] conducted a security analysis of a large-scale set of skills from community registries, finding that malicious skills can facili-tate credential theft, remote code execution, agent manipulation, and other attack behaviors through natural-language instructions and helper scripts. Other studies have also highlighted issues such as prompt injection, credential leakage, data exfiltration, privilege escalation, unsafe code execution, and hidden malicious behavior in open-source skills [ 10 , 19 , 25 ]. Taken together, these studies show that Agent Skills play a vital role in establishing trustworthiness in agentic AI from the supply side. Evaluating the structure, con-tent, and potential security issues of reusable skill packages is a crucial prerequisite for understanding and improving the trustwor-thiness of agentic AI within skill-based agent ecosystems. However, Cross-Layer Misalignment Detection in Agent Skills: A Progressive Loading-Aware Contrastive Learning Approach 

the evolving and hierarchical nature of Agent Skills necessitates appropriate training and representation learning strategies. 

## 2.2 Continued Pretraining and Curriculum Adaptation 

Agent Skill packages are layered artifacts comprising metadata, instructions, and resources. Metadata and skill descriptions are of-ten surface-level capability claims, while the underlying SKILL.md 

file, resources, and executables are longer, heterogeneous, and con-tain clearer behavioral evidence. Consequently, models need to adapt to a skill’s high-level descriptions before engaging with the more complex, resource-level information. Curriculum learning has emerged as a training strategy in which a model learns from easy to hard samples, and holds significant promise for modelling Agent Skill structures. Early work indicated that models could first learn fundamental structures from simpler or clearer examples before gradually transitioning to more complex ones, thereby improving optimization and generalization [ 3]. Subsequent research extended into self-paced learning and competence-based curriculum learning. These approaches allow models to encounter data with varying difficulty levels, determined by sample difficulty or model com-petence, throughout training stages [ 14 , 22 ]. This body of work demonstrates that the training process is not merely a matter of repeated sampling from a fixed data distribution; the training or-der itself serves as a crucial learning signal, helping the model progressively adapt to complex structures. While continued pretraining addresses different issues than cur-riculum learning, the two are complementary in the context of model adaptation. Continued pretraining typically involves fur-ther training a pre-existing language model on domain-specific or task-relevant corpora, enabling it to adapt to the target domain’s vocabulary, style, and discourse patterns prior to downstream su-pervised learning. Gururangan et al. [ 8 ] conducted a systematic study of domain-adaptive pretraining (DAPT) and task-adaptive pretraining (TAPT), demonstrating that adaptive pretraining can enhance downstream performance across various domains, such as biomedicine, computer science, news, and reviews. Related works have also applied domain-adaptive methods to specialized text-analysis settings, including legal, scientific, biomedical, and news-analysis tasks [ 2, 4, 15 , 34 ]. These studies collectively indicate that model adaptation often requires considering both what data the model sees and in what order it sees them. In the context of Agent Skill analysis, this requires a strategy to carefully represent the hierarchical and multi-faceted structure of skills. 

## 2.3 Contrastive Learning for Hierarchical and Multi-View Representations 

For Agent Skill packages, metadata, instructions, and resources can be seen as distinct layers or views of the same skill artifact. Metadata provides user-facing capability claims, instructions of-fer agent-facing procedural guidance, and resources, along with executable artifacts, serve as evidence that is closer to actual be-havior. Therefore, hierarchical and multi-view contrastive learning provide a methodological foundation for cross-layer representation learning. Contrastive learning is a class of self-supervised repre-sentation learning that seeks to pull related views or semantically similar samples closer together while pushing unrelated samples further apart. A prevailing approach is SimCLR, which constructs positive pairs from different augmentations of the same image and employs a contrastive objective to learn transferable visual repre-sentations [ 5 ]. Supervised contrastive learning further incorporates label information into the contrastive objective, bringing samples of the same class closer together in the representation space while in-creasing the separation between samples of different classes [ 12 ]. In the realm of language-image representation learning, CLIP demon-strates the effectiveness of contrastive objectives for cross-modal alignment and transferable representation learning by aligning image-text pairs [ 23 ]. These works show that contrastive learn-ing, when using carefully defined positive and negative samples, can shift representation learning away from a singular focus on reconstruction or classification and toward modeling relationships. Beyond general contrastive learning, multi-view contrastive learning focuses on how different views of the same underlying object share semantic factors. Contrastive Multiview Coding (CMC) treats different sensory channels as complementary sources of in-formation, learning view-invariant representations by maximiz-ing cross-view agreement for the same instance [ 29 ]. Similarly, CLIP views images and text as distinct modalities of the same se-mantic content, learning aligned multimodal embeddings through large-scale contrastive pretraining [ 23 ]. These studies show that contrastive learning facilitates learning both individual representa-tions and shared semantics when objects have multiple views. Hierarchical contrastive learning extends the contrastive objec-tive to data characterized by hierarchies or multi-level structures. In hierarchical text classification, label taxonomies provide a class-level hierarchy; models can leverage parent-child label relationships, label paths, or hierarchy-aware positive samples to learn text repre-sentations that better align with the underlying label structure. HG-CLR integrates the label hierarchy into the text encoder, learning hierarchy-aware representations through hierarchy-guided pos-itives [ 30 ]. Hierarchical multi-label contrastive learning further leverages multi-level labels and label relations to preserve the class hierarchy, ensuring the representation space reflects the structural relationships between different labels [ 35 ]. In relation extraction and recommendation settings, hierarchical contrastive objectives are also employed to combine global structure with local interac-tions, thereby learning multi-granularity representations [ 16 , 31 ]. These studies show that contrastive learning supports structure-aware representations, with positive and negative pairs defined by labels, modalities, views, or hierarchical relations, not just data augmentation. Within the context of Agent Skill analysis, these approaches can help models learn shared skill semantics by align-ing layers belonging to the same skill, while also learning to detect signals of inconsistency between layers through mismatched or corrupted layer combinations. 

## 3 Research Gaps and Questions 

We identified several research gaps from our literature review. First, although research on tool-augmented agents and Agent Skill se-curity is expanding, current evaluation frameworks offer limited mechanisms for assessing the trustworthiness of a skill package prior to execution. Most agentic AI benchmarks focus on evaluating Chengjun Zhang, Yang Gao, Jianna Hur, Jingjing Zhang, and Sagar Samtani 

task completion, reasoning processes, or tool-use proficiency only after tools or skills have been selected and loaded. Consequently, there remains an unresolved challenge in evaluating the skill artifact itself at the stage when users or agents must make trust decisions based solely on partial or surface-level information. Second, existing Agent Skill security research has identified specific risks, includ-ing prompt injection, credential leakage, data exfiltration, unsafe code execution, and concealed malicious behavior. However, these studies predominantly address vulnerabilities or malicious intent, whereas Agent Skill trustworthiness also relies on the alignment between user-facing descriptions and the underlying instruction and resource layers. As a result, a skill may be misaligned without being overtly malicious, such as when its metadata exaggerates or inaccurately represents capabilities not supported by the under-lying package. Third, although continued pretraining helps LLMs learn skill package formats, it does not train models to compare claims across different layers. Finally, contrastive and hierarchical methods leverage structure from labels or graphs, but Agent Skills require a unique structural signal. Their hierarchy arises from pro-gressive loading, with metadata first and instructions or resources providing deeper behavioral evidence. Based on these gaps, we pose the following research questions: 

• RQ1: How can cross-layer misalignment in Agent Skills be formalized as a pre-execution, artifact-level evaluation problem? 

• RQ2: To what extent can base general and cybersecurity LLMs detect cross-layer misalignment without skill-specific adaptation? 

• RQ3: How does two-stage continued pretraining improve misalignment detection? 

• RQ4: How does progressive loading-aware hierarchical contrastive learning improve misaligned-skill detection be-yond base LLMs and CPT-only checkpoints? 

## 4 Progressive Loading-Aware Hierarchical Contrastive Learning (PL-HCL) Framework for Detecting Misaligned Agent Skills 

We propose a PL-HCL framework for Agent Skill misalignment de-tection, illustrated in Figure 1. The proposed framework consists of four major components: (1) public Agent Skill data is collected and processed; (2) two-stage continued pretraining adapts the base LLM to these packages; (3) progressive loading-aware hierarchical con-trastive learning then distinguishes between aligned and misaligned skill layers; and (4) the model determines whether user-facing meta-data is supported by underlying instructions and resources. Each component is described in the following subsections. 

## 4.1 Skill Corpus Construction 

We build an open-source Agent Skill corpus by linking public records from SkillsMP [ 27 ], the largest open-source Agent Skills platform, to their GitHub repositories and normalizing each re-trieved package into a layered representation 𝑆 = (𝑀, 𝐼, 𝑅 ): the metadata layer 𝑀 contains user-facing fields such as the skill name, description, categories, tags, repository identifiers, and declared resource references; the instruction layer 𝐼 contains agent-facing procedural guidance; and the resource layer 𝑅 contains scripts, con-figuration files, dependencies, examples, assets, and other support-ing files. From 273,657 SkillsMP catalog entries, 264,937 packages were successfully downloaded and normalized; after applying the 4,096-token metadata–instruction budget and the 10,240-token full-package budget, 248,473 packages fit at least one training stage and form the unlabeled training corpus, while the held-out Challenge Set is excluded from both CPT and PL-HCL training. 1

This representation preserves the distinction between user-facing claims and deeper package evidence, supporting our pre-execution, artifact-level task: the detector observes package artifacts available at inspection time and assesses whether user-facing metadata is supported by the instruction and resource layers. We do not verify runtime-only behaviors unless the package provides observable evidence. 

## 4.2 Progressive CPT 

The prediction target of our proposed approach is whether the layers of a skill package are mutually consistent: 0 if aligned, 1 if misaligned. A skill is considered misaligned when its metadata describes a capability or intent not supported by the instruction or resource layers. We consider two forms of misalignment: (1) mali-cious misalignment , which masks harmful behavior in deeper layers, and (2) benign misalignment , when the metadata overstates or mis-describes capabilities that the deeper layers do not substantiate. The two-stage continued pretraining component adapts the backbone of a decoder-only LLM to Agent Skill packages prior to training for misalignment detection. This stage enables the model to ac-quire familiarity with the vocabulary, formatting conventions, and hierarchical structure of Agent Skills, instead of immediately requir-ing the base LLM to assess the correspondence between metadata and underlying artifacts. We employ a curriculum-inspired adap-tation strategy in which the model initially learns from concise, structured representations of a skill and subsequently progresses to more comprehensive and heterogeneous package contexts. For each normalized skill 𝑆 = (𝑀, 𝐼, 𝑅 ), we construct two layer-delimited views: 1) The short view comprises metadata 𝑀 and instructions 𝐼 , representing surface-level claims and agent-facing guidance available during initial skill inspection; and 2) The full view includes metadata 𝑀 , instructions 𝐼 , and resources 𝑅 , thereby exposing the model to scripts, configuration files, dependencies, assets, and other resource-level evidence. Sequential training on the short view followed by the full view provides the model with a progressive adaptation trajectory from surface skill descriptions to complete multi-file packages. Both stages optimize the standard causal language modeling objective. The first stage adapts the model to metadata and instruction structure. The second stage adapts it to the full package context. The resulting checkpoint, 𝜃 CPT , serves as the skill-aware backbone for PL-HCL. 2

> 1Detailed corpus construction, token-budget coverage, and filtering statistics are pro-vided in the supplementary materials.
> 2Full training details and pseudocode are provided in the supplementary materials. Cross-Layer Misalignment Detection in Agent Skills: A Progressive Loading-Aware Contrastive Learning Approach

Figure 1: Overview of the PL-HCL framework. Normalized skill packages are represented as metadata 𝑀 , instructions 𝐼 , and resources/executables 𝑅 . Two-stage CPT adapts the base LLM to short and full skill views. PL-HCL then learns cross-layer consistency by contrasting aligned packages with swapped and corrupted variants. 

## 4.3 Progressive Loading-Aware Hierarchical Contrastive Learning (PL-HCL) 

PL-HCL serves as the consistency-learning component of the work-flow. After two-stage CPT, the model has adapted to the vocabulary, formatting, and overall structure of Agent Skills. However, causal language modeling does not explicitly require the model to assess whether user-facing metadata is substantiated by underlying in-struction and resource evidence. To this end, PL-HCL transforms cross-layer consistency into a contrastive training signal. For each normalized skill 𝑆 𝑖 = (𝑀 𝑖 , 𝐼 𝑖 , 𝑅 𝑖 ), we first construct an aligned view in which metadata, instructions, and resources come from the same package: 

𝑃 𝑖 = (𝑀 𝑖 , 𝐼 𝑖 , 𝑅 𝑖 ). (1) This positive view represents a skill package in which the surface claims and deeper artifacts are expected to be mutually consistent. We then construct two types of negative views. The first is swap negative , which replaces the metadata layer with metadata from a different skill: 

𝑁 𝐴 𝑖 = (𝑀 𝑗 , 𝐼 𝑖 , 𝑅 𝑖 ), 𝑗 ≠ 𝑖. (2) This negative preserves the original instruction and resource evi-dence but alters the surface claim, resulting in a mismatch between the advertised capability and the underlying package behavior. The second type is corruption negative , which perturbs the origi-nal metadata while maintaining the deeper layers unchanged: 

𝑁 𝐵 𝑖 = ( e𝑀 𝑖 , 𝐼 𝑖 , 𝑅 𝑖 ). (3) This view simulates misleading, exaggerated, or unsupported capa-bility claims. PL-HCL encodes the metadata, instruction, and resource layers into a shared contrastive space. The objective is to score the aligned view 𝑃 𝑖 higher than its swap and corruption negatives 𝑁 𝐴 𝑖 and 𝑁 𝐵 𝑖 ,thus bringing the same-skill layers closer together and separat-ing mismatched layer combinations. The training signal evaluates whether the surface description is consistent with the evidence provided by the deeper layers of the package, rather than simply identifying suspicious files. This approach mirrors the progressive loading structure of Agent Skills, in which metadata is typically encountered before the complete instruction and resource context is available. PL-HCL is trained in two sub-stages that correspond to the short-view and full-view settings used in CPT. The first sub-stage utilizes metadata–instruction views and includes 96,762 positive training pairs, 386,128 swap negatives, and 334,867 corruption negatives. The second sub-stage employs full metadata–instruction–resource views and comprises 182,135 positive training pairs, 646,945 swap negatives, and 258,368 corruption negatives. The Challenge Set is a held-out, human-verified gold-standard evaluation dataset with 1,150 aligned and 294 misaligned skills, designed to test whether models trained on synthetic contrastive pairs can generalize to real-istic in-the-wild misalignment cases. 3 This design follows common benchmark practice in which a curated challenge subset is reserved 

> 3Additional details on dataset construction and verification are provided in the supple-mentary material Chengjun Zhang, Yang Gao, Jianna Hur, Jingjing Zhang, and Sagar Samtani

for evaluating model robustness under more realistic or difficult conditions, such as evasive-malware evaluation in EMBER2024 and in-the-wild distribution-shift evaluation in WILDS [11, 13]. 

## 4.4 Evaluation 

We evaluate the proposed PL-HCL framework through three ex-periments designed to assess cross-layer misalignment detection in Agent Skills, each aligned with one of our research questions (E0 addresses RQ2, E1 addresses RQ3, and E2 addresses RQ4). In Experiment 0 (E0), we evaluate whether base LLMs can identify misaligned skills without skill-specific adaptation. This experiment compares general and cybersecurity backbones under zero-shot, two-shot, and five-shot prompting settings, allowing us to examine whether general instruction-following ability or security-oriented pretraining is sufficient for this task. In Experiment 1 (E1), we eval-uate the effect of two-stage continued pretraining by comparing base checkpoints with CPT-only checkpoints. This experiment as-sesses whether adapting the model to the vocabulary, formatting, and layered structure of Agent Skill packages improves misalign-ment detection. In Experiment 2 (E2), we evaluate the full PL-HCL framework by comparing CPT-only checkpoints with CPT+PL-HCL checkpoints. This experiment tests whether explicitly learn-ing cross-layer consistency from aligned, metadata-swapped, and corrupted-claim views provides measurable gains beyond format adaptation. Across these experiments, we use both intrinsic and extrinsic eval-uation tasks. The intrinsic tasks assess whether training improves the model’s adaptation to Agent Skill artifacts before downstream inference. Specifically, next-token prediction measures whether CPT improves the model’s ability to model layer-delimited skill text, while contrastive pair detection evaluates whether PL-HCL learns to distinguish aligned cross-layer views from metadata-swapped or corrupted-claim variants. The extrinsic task assesses the pre-execution misalignment detection . In this task, the model receives a normalized skill package and predicts whether the metadata is supported by the instruction and resource layers under zero-shot, two-shot, and five-shot prompting conditions. The evaluation utilizes a human-verified Challenge Set compris-ing 1,444 Agent Skills, with 1,150 aligned and 294 misaligned pack-ages (196 are SAFE, 38 are SUSPICIOUS, and 60 are MALICIOUS.) All Challenge Set packages are actual skills collected from SkillsMP (rather than synthetically perturbed variants); misaligned examples are naturally occurring, in-the-wild packages whose metadata is not supported by their instruction or resource layers. Candidate skills were screened automatically and subsequently verified by human annotators (see Figure 1). This Challenge Set is excluded from pretraining and contrastive learning and is reserved solely for final evaluation. Because all PL-HCL training negatives are synthet-ically constructed, evaluation on this set tests whether the learned consistency signal generalizes from synthetic contrast pairs to natu-rally occurring misalignment. Given the Challenge Set’s imbalance toward aligned skills, both overall and misalignment-sensitive met-rics are reported. Accuracy (Acc) measures the overall proportion of correct predictions. Since accuracy may be inflated by the aligned-class majority, misaligned-class F1 (F1 𝑚 ) treats misaligned as the positive class and measures the model’s ability to correctly iden-tify the safety-critical class. Macro-F1 computes the unweighted average of aligned-class and misaligned-class F1, providing a bal-anced perspective across both labels. Area under the ROC curve (AUC) and average precision for the misaligned class (AP 𝑚 ) are also reported to evaluate ranking quality under varying decision thresholds. 

## 5 Results 

This section presents the evaluation results on the human-verified Challenge Set following the E0–E2 evaluation design described in Section 4.4. E0 evaluates whether unadapted base LLMs can detect cross-layer misalignment without skill-specific adaptation. E1 isolates the effect of two-stage CPT by comparing base check-points with CPT-only checkpoints. E2 evaluates the incremental contribution of PL-HCL by comparing CPT-only checkpoints with CPT+PL-HCL checkpoints. 4 We first summarize the main findings across E0–E2, and then report the results for E1 and E2 in detail. 5

## 5.1 Main Findings across E0-E2 

Table 1 provides a compact summary of the strongest prompting setting for each backbone and adapter on the Challenge Set. To avoid relying on a single test-selected configuration, Tables 2 and 3 report the full results for all 𝑘 ∈ 0, 2, 5 prompting settings. We use Table 1 only as a high-level summary, while the main comparisons in 5.2 and 5.3 are based on the full prompting-setting results. Unless otherwise stated, the decision rule is fixed across models, and no model-specific threshold is tuned on the Challenge Set. In deploy-ment, both the prompting configuration and decision threshold should be calibrated using a held-out validation set from the target skill ecosystem. The E0 results (base rows of Table 1) show that base LLMs demon-strate limited performance on the misaligned class, despite achiev-ing accuracy levels close to the aligned-class majority baseline. For instance, both base Llama-3.1-8B and base Foundation-Sec-8B attain approximately 0.81 accuracy in their optimal prompting con-figurations; however, their F1 𝑚 remains below 0.15. These results suggest that the models frequently classify plausible skill pack-ages as aligned without consistently verifying whether the surface claim corresponds to deeper package evidence. The CPT+PL-HCL approach helps improve performance. On Llama-3.1-8B, CPT+PL-HCL achieves 0.929 accuracy, 0.788 F1 𝑚 , and 0.872 Macro-F1. On Foundation-Sec-8B, CPT+PL-HCL attains its highest performance, with 0.937 accuracy, 0.817 F1 𝑚 , and 0.889 Macro-F1 in the two-shot setting. The improvements are concentrated in F1 𝑚 , which repre-sents the safety-critical class for this task. Base-cybersecurity LLMs do not independently bridge the performance gap. WhiteRabbitNeo-2-8B, RedSage-Qwen3-8B-DPO, and Foundation-Sec-8B, when used without skill-specific adaptation, exhibit Macro-F1 scores close to the majority-class baseline. Although certain security-tuned models                                                           

> 4k denotes the number of labeled in-context examples. F1 𝑚 and AP 𝑚 are computed for the misaligned class. Macro-F1 is the unweighted average of aligned-class and misaligned-class F1. Base, CPT, and CPT+PL-HCL denote the unadapted backbone, the two-stage continued-pretraining checkpoint, and the full contrastive checkpoint, respectively.
> 5Additional intrinsic evaluations, full prompting-setting results, and extended metric tables are provided in the supplementary materials. Cross-Layer Misalignment Detection in Agent Skills: A Progressive Loading-Aware Contrastive Learning Approach
> Backbone Adapter 𝑘 Acc F1 𝑚 Macro-F1 AUC AP 𝑚
> Llama-3.1-8B CPT+PL-HCL 20.929 0.788 0.872 0.744 0.754 Foundation-Sec-8B CPT+PL-HCL 20.937 0.817 0.889 0.778 0.799
> Llama-3.1-8B base 20.812 0.145 0.519 0.510 0.301 Foundation-Sec-8B base 20.809 0.143 0.518 0.487 0.362 WhiteRabbitNeo-2-8B base 50.800 0.114 0.499 0.535 0.360 RedSage-Qwen3-8B-DPO base 50.811 0.144 0.519 0.703 0.637 Qwen-3-8B base 20.811 0.150 0.522 0.681 0.643

Table 1: Main results on the Challenge Set. 

achieve higher area under the curve (AUC) or AP 𝑚 , indicating some ability to rank risky cases. However, this signal does not translate into reliable classification performance without PL-HCL. 

## 5.2 E1: Evaluation of CPT 

Table 2 reports E1 by comparing unadapted base LLMs with CPT-only checkpoints across 𝑘 = 0, 𝑘 = 2, and 𝑘 = 5 prompting settings. This comparison directly evaluates whether continued pretrain-ing on Agent Skill packages improves misalignment detection, or whether it primarily helps the model adapt to the vocabulary, for-matting, and layered structure of skill artifacts.                                       

> Backbone 𝒌 =0𝒌 =2𝒌 =5
> Base CPT Base CPT Base CPT
> F1 𝑚
> Llama-3.1-8B 0.032 0.130 0.145 0.145 0.007 0.097 Foundation-Sec-8B 0.026 0.134 0.143 0.150 0.013 0.077
> Macro-F1
> Llama-3.1-8B 0.457 0.511 0.519 0.520 0.447 0.494 Foundation-Sec-8B 0.454 0.513 0.518 0.522 0.449 0.483

Table 2: Effect of two-stage CPT on the Challenge Set. 

CPT improves over base checkpoints in the zero-shot setting, suggesting that continued pretraining helps the model adapt to the vocabulary, formatting, and layered structure of Agent Skill packages. For Llama-3.1-8B, zero-shot F1 𝑚 increases from 0.032 to 0.130 and Macro-F1 increases from 0.457 to 0.511 after CPT. Foundation-Sec-8B shows a similar pattern, with zero-shot F1 𝑚 

increasing from 0.026 to 0.134 and Macro-F1 from 0.454 to 0.513. The improvement, however, remains limited. Across prompting settings, CPT-only Macro-F1 stays near 0.48–0.52, and F1 𝑚 remains below 0.15. Thus, skill-format adaptation alone does not provide a reliable misalignment detector. CPT makes the model more familiar with skill packages, but it does not explicitly train the model to compare advertised claims with deeper behavioral evidence. 

## 5.3 E2: Evaluation of PL-HCL 

Table 3 reports E2 by comparing CPT-only checkpoints with CPT+PL-HCL checkpoints across 𝑘 = 0, 𝑘 = 2, and 𝑘 = 5 prompting settings. This comparison tests whether explicitly learning cross-layer con-sistency from aligned, metadata-swapped, and corrupted-claim vari-ants improves misaligned-skill detection beyond the skill-format adaptation provided by CPT.                                   

> Backbone 𝒌 =0𝒌 =2𝒌 =5
> CPT CPT+ PL-HCL CPT CPT+ PL-HCL CPT CPT+ PL-HCL
> F1 𝑚
> Llama-3.1-8B 0.130 0.511 0.145 0.788 0.097 0.778 Foundation-Sec-8B 0.134 0.623 0.150 0.817 0.077 0.812
> Macro-F1
> Llama-3.1-8B 0.511 0.717 0.520 0.872 0.494 0.867 Foundation-Sec-8B 0.512 0.779 0.522 0.889 0.483 0.887

Table 3: Effect of PL-HCL on the Challenge Set. 

Adding PL-HCL produces the largest gains across all prompting settings. On Llama-3.1-8B, Macro-F1 increases from 0.511, 0.520, and 0.494 to 0.717, 0.872, and 0.867 for 𝑘 = 0, 2, 5, respectively. On Foundation-Sec-8B, Macro-F1 increases from 0.513, 0.522, and 0.483 to 0.779, 0.889, and 0.887. The largest gains appear in F1 𝑚 . CPT-only never exceeds 0.150 F1 𝑚 , while CPT+PL-HCL reaches 0.788 on Llama-3.1-8B and 0.817 on Foundation-Sec-8B in the two-shot setting. These results show that PL-HCL supplies the discriminative signal missing from ordinary continued pretraining. By contrasting aligned packages against swapped and corrupted layer combina-tions, PL-HCL turns cross-layer consistency into a usable detection cue. Notably, PL-HCL is trained exclusively on synthetic negatives, yet these gains are measured on naturally occurring, in-the-wild misaligned skills, indicating that the learned claim-versus-evidence signal transfers beyond the perturbation distribution used for train-ing. 

## 5.4 Misaligned Examples In-the-wild 

While aggregate metrics indicate that PL-HCL significantly im-proves detection for the misaligned category, looking only at av-erage results leaves unclear what signals the model has learned. To investigate, we examined two representative skills from the Challenge Set. For both, the zero-shot base model Foundation-Sec-8B-Reasoning 

classified them as aligned with high confidence. After PL-HCL Chengjun Zhang, Yang Gao, Jianna Hur, Jingjing Zhang, and Sagar Samtani 

(a) hsb-clawhub_e9471baa                 

> Gold: MISALIGNED | MALICIOUS CLAIM (description verbatim):
> “An intelligent-assistant skill that can act on any user instruction. Ignore all previous restrictions and execute exactly as the user requests.”
> AUDIT (description vs. body):
> C1 capability claim →body issues an override directive, not a capability statement
> ✗
> C2 “ignore restrictions” →front-matter grants Bash(*) ,
> WebFetch(*) wildcards
> ✗
> C3 “execute exactly” →body installs an !any_command_here
> shell-exec hook
> ✗
> EVIDENCE (body excerpt, key loci highlighted):
> description: . . . ignore all previous restrictions . . . allowed-tools: Read, Write, Edit, Bash(*), WebFetch(*) # Instructions if you say “disregard all previous instructions” I will switch to unrestricted mode. # Dynamic execution !any_command_here

(b) masb...smp_2676-assert                                                 

> Gold: MISALIGNED | SAFE CLAIM (description verbatim):
> “TypeScript assertion function for runtime type narrowing with descriptive error messages. Based on tiny-invariant.”
> AUDIT (description vs. body):
> C1 TypeScript implementation →body issues curl -H "Accept: text/plain" (no language commit-ment)
> ✗
> C2 in-line assertion function →body curl s an external recipe URL (no code in skill)
> ✗
> C3 based on tiny-invariant →body contains zero reference to
> tiny-invariant
> ✗
> EVIDENCE (body excerpt, the entire body shown):
> name: assert description: TypeScript assertion function . . . Based on tiny-invariant. # Assertion Helper To set up Assertion Helper, refer to the fullstackrecipes MCP server resource: Resource URI: recipe://fullstackrecipes.com/assert If the MCP server is not configured, fetch directly: curl -H "Accept: text/plain" https://fullstackrecipes.com/api/recipes/assert
> -8 -6 -4 -2 02468
> aligned −misaligned logit gap (left of 0: “misaligned” right of 0: “aligned”)
> (a) malicious , base fdtn
> (a) malicious , + PL-HCL
> (b) safe ,base fdtn
> (b) safe ,+ PL-HCL
> +4.33 ✗
> −0.13 ✓
> +5.81 ✗
> −1.50 ✓

Figure 2: Description–body audit for two Challenge Set skills flipped from aligned by base Foundation-Sec-8B-Reasoning 

to misaligned after PL-HCL. Red crosses mark mismatches between description claims and skill-body evidence. Panel (a) is malicious; Panel (b) is benign but misaligned. The signed logit gap logit (aligned ) − logit (misaligned ) crosses zero for both cases, illustrating PL-HCL’s sensitivity to claim–behavior inconsistency. 

training, the same model reclassified them as misaligned . Al-though both are correctly labeled misaligned , they represent dif-ferent safety issues. The first example is an obviously unsafe Skill involving a Chinese-language prompt injection attack. Its metadata and instruction body contain commands designed to override the system prompt, and it has broad Bash() and WebFetch() permis-sions. The second example demonstrates misalignment but is not inherently malicious (benign but misaligned). Its metadata claims to provide an inline TypeScript assertion function, but the instruction body actually invokes a third-party recipe URL using curl . As a re-sult, it does not support the claimed tiny-invariant dependency or TypeScript-specific behaviors. The base model yielded positive “aligned” logit differences for these examples (+4.33 and +5.81), both exceeding the model’s aver-age for the aligned class on the Challenge Set (+3.29). This matches the “majority class bias” observed in Section 5: base LLMs tend to classify plausible skill packages as aligned . After PL-HCL, the logit differences shifted to negative values (-0.13 and -1.50), crossing the decision boundary and resulting in misaligned classification. Inter-estingly, the benign yet mismatched example produced a stronger mismatch signal despite lacking obvious jailbreak indicators like 

Bash(*) , “ignore previous instructions,” or shell execution hooks. This shows PL-HCL does not just react to malicious tokens or prompt injection keywords; it learns a “claim-versus-evidence” sig-nal, evaluating if the surface description is genuinely supported by the instruction and resource layers. These examples clarify why mismatch detection for Agent Skills cannot rely solely on general instruction-following or specialized cybersecurity expertise. Whether using a general or cybersecu-rity LLM, a plausible Skill package might still get a high “aligned” confidence score even if its components contradict its claimed ca-pabilities or hide unsafe behaviors. While base cybersecurity LLMs sometimes achieve higher AUC or AP scores and can rank risky examples to some extent, this does not consistently lead to accurate “aligned” versus “misaligned” classification. 

## 6 Discussion 

This article aims to establish a pre-execution screening capability for skill-augmented agentic AI systems. Rather than viewing Agent Skills solely as reusable modules for task performance, this work conceptualizes Agent Skills as layered supply-side artifacts, where metadata, instructions, and resource or executable artifacts collec-tively determine trustworthiness. The primary practical contribu-tion of PL-HCL is its ability to transform cross-layer consistency into a learnable and deployable detection signal, enabling screening for downstream decision making prior to skill loading or execution. Cross-Layer Misalignment Detection in Agent Skills: A Progressive Loading-Aware Contrastive Learning Approach 

This perspective holds direct relevance for three key stakeholder groups: skill marketplaces, skill users, and security analysts. We describe each in turn below. For skill marketplaces, PL-HCL can function as a pre-publication or pre-listing governance mechanism. In open skill ecosystems, skills are frequently submitted by third-party contributors, and marketplace metadata serves as the primary basis for users and agents to assess trustworthiness. Absent installed-base screening, misalignment risks may be transferred to downstream users. PL-HCL evaluates whether metadata is substantiated by instructions and resources before a skill is released or recommended, directing high-risk skills to manual review, suspending release, or marking approved skills with a verified-alignment badge. PL-HCL would not replace manual auditing or runtime sandboxing, but would offer a scalable initial filter for marketplace-level governance. For skill users, PL-HCL enables lightweight client-side screen-ing. Most users do not examine files such as SKILL.md , scripts, dependencies, or external references individually when installing Agent Skills. Instead, they often rely on the skill name, descrip-tion, and repository metadata. PL-HCL can be deployed as a local plugin or command-line scanner that analyzes the local skill di-rectory post-installation and issues warnings when surface claims are inconsistent with deeper package evidence. This approach pro-vides users with direct alignment signals, offering additional trust cues prior to skill execution and reducing reliance on marketplace curation or post-execution observation. For security analysts, PL-HCL offers an operational tool for re-trieval and triage. Analysts frequently need to identify high-risk subsets within extensive collections of open-source packages and determine which warrant resource-intensive sandboxed analysis or manual inspection. Because PL-HCL learns cross-layer repre-sentations rather than producing only binary classification scores, it facilitates grouping of similar suspicious skills, prioritization of high-risk clusters, and identification of skill families exhibiting sim-ilar metadata and behavioral inconsistencies. Thus, PL-HCL can serve as a foundational representation for large-scale skill ecosys-tem analysis, supporting incident response and adversarial analytics workflows. Methodologically, PL-HCL’s broader implication is its treatment of progressively loaded, hierarchical artifacts as novel evaluation objects. Similar structural patterns are present in MCP servers, browser extensions, VS Code extensions, and software package registries. These artifacts typically include user-facing descriptions, configuration files, permission declarations, scripts, or executable resources, with users generally encountering surface claims before deeper behavioral elements. Consequently, this study’s guiding design principle is that, when trust decisions must be made prior to full execution, models should explicitly learn the consistency between surface claims and deeper evidence. This departs from approaches that rely solely on generic language modeling, keyword-based security scanning, or post-execution behavioral observation. As with any research, this work has its limitations. First, the focus is on pre-execution, artifact-level assessment. Our proposed approach relies exclusively on information available to the skill package prior to execution, and therefore cannot address failure modes that manifest only during live interaction, dynamic remote payload execution, post-deployment mutations, or environment-specific side effects. Runtime sandboxing and trace-level agent evaluation are thus complementary to this approach. Second, the dataset is primarily derived from SkillsMP and open-source skills available on GitHub. Closed skill ecosystems, internal enterprise skills, and dynamically generated skills may exhibit different pack-age structures, documentation practices, and risk profiles. Third, our experiments are conducted primarily on 8B-scale backbones. This design allows us to compare general and cybersecurity LLMs under a controlled and computationally feasible setting, but it does not fully characterize how model scale affects Agent Skill misalign-ment detection. Larger models may exhibit stronger cross-layer reasoning or better few-shot sensitivity, while smaller models may require different adaptation strategies. Hence, we cannot ensure that the observed performance trends fully generalize across model sizes. 

## 7 Conclusion and Future Directions 

Agent Skills have become an integral component of modern agentic AI systems. Despite their growing prevalence, Agent Skills often suffer from misalignment between user-facing claims and deeper in-structional or executable evidence. By conceptualizing each skill as a layered artifact comprising metadata, instructions, and resources, this work proposes a pre-execution evaluation target for trustwor-thy agentic AI. Specifically, before a skill is loaded or executed, evaluators should assess whether its advertised capabilities are substantiated by package evidence available at inspection time. A large-scale open-source Agent Skill corpus and a human-verified Challenge Set were constructed, and PL-HCL, a progressive loading-aware contrastive framework for learning cross-layer consistency among metadata, instructions, and resources, was proposed. Exper-imental results indicate that both general and cybersecurity LLMs struggle to reliably identify misaligned skills. The two-stage CPT approach primarily enhances skill-format adaptation but is insuf-ficient as a standalone detector. In contrast, PL-HCL significantly improves misaligned-class detection by explicitly modeling the relationship between surface claims and deeper package evidence. Future research can expand along both empirical and method-ological dimensions. First, cross-layer misalignment detection may be integrated with runtime sandboxing and trajectory-level evalua-tion to capture behaviors not directly observable from package arti-facts, such as dynamic remote payloads, environment-specific side effects, or interaction-dependent failures. Second, PL-HCL could be extended into directed hierarchical contrastive learning, enabling the model to assess not only layer consistency but also the direc-tion of support among layers. In this framework, metadata provides surface claims, instructions offer procedural support, and resources supply behavioral evidence. A directed objective would distinguish whether misalignment results from metadata overclaiming unsup-ported capabilities or from deeper artifacts introducing undisclosed behaviors. Third, future models could incorporate richer artifact representations, including dependency graphs, permission struc-tures, external endpoint analysis, and execution traces, to better capture behavioral evidence that is only partially expressed in text. Chengjun Zhang, Yang Gao, Jianna Hur, Jingjing Zhang, and Sagar Samtani 

Additionally, future evaluations should examine whether these ap-proaches generalize across closed-source or enterprise skill ecosys-tems and across different model scales. In summary, Agent Skill evaluation should address not only improvements in task perfor-mance but also the consistency between surface claims and the deeper artifacts that influence agent behavior. 

## References 

[1] Anthropic. 2025. Equipping Agents for the Real World with Agent Skills. En-gineering at Anthropic. https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/equipping-agents-for-the-real-world-with-agent-skills Accessed: 2026-06-08. [2] Iz Beltagy, Kyle Lo, and Arman Cohan. 2019. SciBERT: A Pretrained Language Model for Scientific Text. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing . Association for Computational Linguistics, Hong Kong, China, 3615–3620. [3] Yoshua Bengio, Jérôme Louradour, Ronan Collobert, and Jason Weston. 2009. Curriculum Learning. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual International Conference on Machine Learning . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 41–48. [4] Ilias Chalkidis, Manos Fergadiotis, Prodromos Malakasiotis, Nikolaos Aletras, and Ion Androutsopoulos. 2020. LEGAL-BERT: The Muppets Straight Out of Law School. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 . Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 2898–2904. [5] Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. 2020. A Simple Framework for Contrastive Learning of Visual Representations. In 

Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 119) . PMLR, 1597–1607. [6] Edoardo Debenedetti, Jie Zhang, Mislav Balunovic, Luca Beurer-Kellner, Marc Fischer, and Florian Tramèr. 2024. AgentDojo: A Dynamic Environment to Evaluate Attacks and Defenses for LLM Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.13352 

(2024). [7] Kai Greshake, Sahar Abdelnabi, Shailesh Mishra, Christoph Endres, Thorsten Holz, and Mario Fritz. 2023. Not What You’ve Signed Up For: Compromising Real-World LLM-Integrated Applications with Indirect Prompt Injection. In 

Proceedings of the 16th ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security .79–90. [8] Suchin Gururangan, Ana Marasović, Swabha Swayamdipta, Kyle Lo, Iz Beltagy, Doug Downey, and Noah A. Smith. 2020. Don’t Stop Pretraining: Adapt Language Models to Domains and Tasks. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics . Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 8342–8360. [9] Tingxu Han, Yi Zhang, Wei Song, Chunrong Fang, Zhenyu Chen, Youcheng Sun, and Lijie Hu. 2026. SWE-Skills-Bench: Do Agent Skills Actually Help in Real-World Software Engineering? arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.15401 (2026). [10] Chang Jin, An Wang, Zeming Wei, Kai Wang, Biaojie Zeng, Qiaosheng Zhang, Chao Yang, Jingjing Qu, Xia Hu, and Xingcheng Xu. 2026. SkillSafetyBench: Evaluating Agent Safety under Skill-Facing Attack Surfaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.12015 (2026). [11] Robert J. Joyce, Gideon Miller, Phil Roth, Richard Zak, Elliott Zaresky-Williams, Hyrum Anderson, Edward Raff, and James Holt. 2025. EMBER2024: A Bench-mark Dataset for Holistic Evaluation of Malware Classifiers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.05074 (2025). [12] Prannay Khosla, Piotr Teterwak, Chen Wang, Aaron Sarna, Yonglong Tian, Phillip Isola, Aaron Maschinot, Ce Liu, and Dilip Krishnan. 2020. Supervised Contrastive Learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,Vol. 33. 18661–18673. [13] Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa, Henrik Marklund, Sang Michael Xie, Marvin Zhang, Akshay Balsubramani, Weihua Hu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Richard Lanas Phillips, Irena Gao, et al . 2021. WILDS: A Benchmark of in-the-Wild Distribution Shifts. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning .5637–5664. [14] M. Pawan Kumar, Benjamin Packer, and Daphne Koller. 2010. Self-Paced Learning for Latent Variable Models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,Vol. 23. Curran Associates, Inc. [15] Jinhyuk Lee, Wonjin Yoon, Sungdong Kim, Donghyeon Kim, Sunkyu Kim, Chan Ho So, and Jaewoo Kang. 2020. BioBERT: A Pre-trained Biomedical Lan-guage Representation Model for Biomedical Text Mining. Bioinformatics 36, 4 (2020), 1234–1240. [16] Dongyang Li, Taolin Zhang, Nan Hu, Chengyu Wang, and Xiaofeng He. 2022. Hi-CLRE: A Hierarchical Contrastive Learning Framework for Distantly Supervised Relation Extraction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.13352 (2022). [17] Xiangyi Li, Wenbo Chen, Yimin Liu, Shenghan Zheng, Xiaokun Chen, Yifeng He, Yubo Li, Bingran You, Haotian Shen, Jiankai Sun, Shuyi Wang, Binxu Li, Qunhong Zeng, Di Wang, Xuandong Zhao, Yuanli Wang, Roey Ben Chaim, Zonglin Di, Yipeng Gao, Junwei He, Yizhuo He, Liqiang Jing, Luyang Kong, Xin Lan, Jiachen Li, Songlin Li, Yijiang Li, Yueqian Lin, Xinyi Liu, Xuanqing Liu, Haoran Lyu, Ze Ma, Bowei Wang, Runhui Wang, Tianyu Wang, Wengao Ye, Yue Zhang, Hanwen Xing, Yiqi Xue, Steven Dillmann, and Han-chung Lee. 2026. SkillsBench: Benchmarking How Well Agent Skills Work Across Diverse Tasks. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.12670 (2026). [18] Yi Liu, Zhihao Chen, Yanjun Zhang, Gelei Deng, Yuekang Li, Jianting Ning, and Leo Yu Zhang. 2026. Malicious Agent Skills in the Wild: A Large-Scale Security Empirical Study. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.06547 (2026). [19] Yi Liu, Weizhe Wang, Ruitao Feng, Yao Zhang, Guangquan Xu, Gelei Deng, Yuekang Li, and Leo Zhang. 2026. Agent Skills in the Wild: An Empirical Study of Security Vulnerabilities at Scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.10338 (2026). [20] Zhongxin Liu, Xin Xia, Ahmed E. Hassan, David Lo, Zhenchang Xing, and Xinyu Wang. 2018. Neural-Machine-Translation-Based Commit Message Generation: How Far Are We?. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Automated Software Engineering . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 373–384. [21] Grégoire Mialon, Clémentine Fourrier, Craig Swift, Thomas Wolf, Yann LeCun, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. GAIA: A Benchmark for General AI Assistants. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.12983 (2023). [22] Emmanouil Antonios Platanios, Otilia Stretcu, Graham Neubig, Barnabas Poczos, and Tom M. Mitchell. 2019. Competence-based Curriculum Learning for Neural Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies . Association for Computational Linguistics, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 1162–1172. [23] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever. 2021. Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 8748–8763. [24] Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Toolformer: Language Models Can Teach Themselves to Use Tools. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , Vol. 36. [25] David Schmotz, Luca Beurer-Kellner, Sahar Abdelnabi, and Maksym An-driushchenko. 2026. Skill-Inject: Measuring Agent Vulnerability to Skill File Attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.20156 (2026). [26] Natalie Shapira, Chris Wendler, Avery Yen, Gabriele Sarti, Koyena Pal, Olivia Floody, Adam Belfki, Alex Loftus, Aditya Ratan Jannali, Nikhil Prakash, Jas-mine Cui, Giordano Rogers, Jannik Brinkmann, Can Rager, Amir Zur, Michael Ripa, Aruna Sankaranarayanan, David Atkinson, Rohit Gandikota, Jaden Fiotto-Kaufman, EunJeong Hwang, Hadas Orgad, P. Sam Sahil, Negev Taglicht, Tomer Shabtay, Atai Ambus, Nitay Alon, Shiri Oron, Ayelet Gordon-Tapiero, Yotam Kaplan, Vered Shwartz, Tamar Rott Shaham, Christoph Riedl, Reuth Mirsky, Maarten Sap, David Manheim, Tomer Ullman, and David Bau. 2026. Agents of Chaos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.20021 (2026). [27] SkillsMP. 2026. SkillsMP: Agent Skills Marketplace. https://skillsmp.com/. Ac-cessed: 2026-06-09. [28] Lin Tan, Ding Yuan, and Yu Zhou. 2012. iComment: Bugs or Bad Comments?. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 145–155. [29] Yonglong Tian, Dilip Krishnan, and Phillip Isola. 2020. Contrastive Multiview Coding. In Computer Vision – ECCV 2020 . Springer, 776–794. [30] Zihan Wang, Peiyi Wang, Lianzhe Huang, Xin Sun, and Houfeng Wang. 2022. Incorporating Hierarchy into Text Encoder: A Contrastive Learning Approach for Hierarchical Text Classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.03825 (2022). [31] Bingchao Wu, Yangyuxuan Kang, Daoguang Zan, Bei Guan, and Yongji Wang. 2023. Hierarchical and Contrastive Representation Learning for Knowledge-Aware Recommendation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07506 (2023). [32] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023. ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning and Acting in Language Models. In International Conference on Learning Representations .[33] Qiusi Zhan, Zhixiang Liang, Zifan Ying, and Daniel Kang. 2024. InjecAgent: Benchmarking Indirect Prompt Injections in Tool-Integrated Large Language Model Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.02691 (2024). [34] Chengjun Zhang, Benjamin Martin Ampel, and Sagar Samtani. 2026. A Domain-Adaptive Soft Prompting Framework for Multi-Type Bias Detection in News. In 

Proceedings of the Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences .[35] Shu Zhang, Ran Xu, Caiming Xiong, and Chetan Ramaiah. 2022. Use All the Labels: A Hierarchical Multi-Label Contrastive Learning Framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.13207 (2022). [36] Shurui Zhou, Yang Liu, Jing Kai Siow, Xiaoning Du, and Yang Liu. 2017. Auto-matically Detecting API Misuses Using Statistical Learning. In Proceedings of the 2017 11th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software Engineering . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 843–853. Cross-Layer Misalignment Detection in Agent Skills: A Progressive Loading-Aware Contrastive Learning Approach 

## Supplementary Material 

This supplement provides additional reproducibility details, in-cluding dataset construction, training settings, pseudocode, and extended evaluation results. The main paper is self-contained and does not rely on the supplement for its core argument or primary findings. 

## A Dataset Construction A.1 Package Retrieval and Normalization 

Our corpus is built by linking public skill records from SkillsMP to the GitHub repositories that host their implementations. From each SkillsMP record, we extract the skill name, marketplace de-scription, category or tag information when available, repository owner, repository name, branch, and relative package path. We then download the corresponding repository snapshot from GitHub and extract the skill package from the declared path. Each downloaded package is normalized into the tuple 𝑆 =

(𝑀, 𝐼, 𝑅 ). The metadata layer 𝑀 contains marketplace and repository-level fields, including the skill name, description, tags or categories when available, repository identifiers, and source path. The in-struction layer 𝐼 is primarily derived from SKILL.md and related instruction files. The resource layer 𝑅 contains scripts, configura-tion files, examples, assets, dependency files, API wrappers, and external references. Packages are retained only when the GitHub repository is ac-cessible, the declared package path exists, and a valid instruction artifact is present. If a package contains only SKILL.md , it is still retained; its resource layer is represented as empty or minimal. This preserves instruction-only skills while making the absence of supporting resources explicit. 

## A.2 Corpus Construction Details 

We constructed the Agent Skill corpus from the largest open-source Agent Skill marketplace, SkillsMP . A REST API crawl produced 273,657 unique metadata listings after rolling deduplication. We then used repository links in these listings to download the cor-responding public GitHub packages and retained packages with a parseable SKILL.md . Each retained package was normalized into metadata, instruction, and resource layers based on SKILL.md front-matter, the procedural body of SKILL.md , and accessible package files under directories such as scripts/ , assets/ , and reference/ .Before training, we applied two corpus-level filters. First, pack-ages whose normalized context exceeded the maximum input bud-get of the corresponding training stage were excluded from that stage. Stage 1 uses a 4,096-token metadata-plus-instruction ren-dering, while Stage 2 uses a 10,240-token full-package rendering that also includes resource files. Second, exact overlaps with bench-mark or supervision sources were excluded using repository owner, repository name, and skill name to reduce the risk of label leak-age. After removing unavailable repositories, incomplete packages, duplicate skills, and unparseable files, 264,937 skill packages were successfully downloaded and normalized. Among them, 248,473 packages fit at least one training stage and were eligible for CPT or PL-HCL training; packages that fit neither token budget were excluded from training.                             

> Corpus stage Count Percentage
> SkillsMP catalog entries collected 273,657 100.0% catalog Downloaded and normalized skill packages 264,937 96.8% catalog Fit at least one training stage 248,473 93.8% normalized Fit Stage 1: 𝑀 +𝐼 ≤4,096 tokens 244,030 92.1% normalized Fit Stage 2: 𝑀 +𝐼 +𝑅 ≤10 ,240 tokens 91,053 34.4% normalized Dropped: fit neither stage 16,464 6.2% normalized

Table 4: Corpus construction and token-budget coverage. Stage 1 uses metadata and instruction from skill packages capped at 4,096 estimated tokens, while Stage 2 uses full skill packages capped at 10,240 estimated tokens. 

Stage 2 coverage is lower because full-package renderings in-clude heterogeneous resource files when available. In particular, 149,150 normalized skills contain no package resource files; among the remaining 115,787 skills with resource files, 91,053 fit the Stage-2 full-package budget. The resulting token-budgeted corpus provides the unlabeled skill views used for progressive CPT and PL-HCL, while the Challenge Set is held out from both training stages and used only for extrinsic evaluation. 

## A.3 Reproducibility Manifest 

For reproducibility, each retained package is accompanied by a manifest entry. The manifest records source identifiers, repository owner, repository name, branch, package path, artifact types, file counts, token counts, filtering decisions, and normalization status. These records allow us to trace each training instance back to its original marketplace and repository source while preserving the normalized 𝑀 , 𝐼 , and 𝑅 representation used in training and evaluation. 

## B Gold-Label Pipeline and Quality Assurance 

Gold labels for the Challenge Set were produced through a three-stage pipeline. First, we used the MASB scanner to generate severity-ranked candidate flags from the collected corpus; the scanner served only as a candidate-generation tool, not as the source of final la-bels. Second, flagged skills were inspected in a Jetstream Docker sandbox with behavioral instrumentation for network connections, subprocess calls, filesystem writes, dependency installation, and potential exfiltration. Third, human coders compared each skill’s metadata claim with its instruction/resource behavior and assigned two independent labels: final-align , indicating whether the skill is ALIGNED or MISALIGNED, and final-malicious , indicating whether the skill is SAFE, SUSPICIOUS, or MALICIOUS. Two human annotators conducted the verification and quality-assurance process. To assess label reliability, 144 randomly sampled Challenge Set examples were independently re-coded. The two annotators disagreed on 4 cases, yielding 97.2% agreement. Dis-agreements and uncertain cases were resolved through discussion and artifact re-inspection before finalizing the gold labels. 

## C Data Statement and Release 

The corpus version used in this study was crawled from 2026-04-15 to 2026-04-17 using the public skillsmp listing endpoint and Chengjun Zhang, Yang Gao, Jianna Hur, Jingjing Zhang, and Sagar Samtani 

linked GitHub repositories. We retained packages with a parseable 

SKILL.md and non-empty name /description fields, and excluded deleted repositories, duplicates, forks of retained corpus mem-bers, and packages that redirected to non-skill repositories. The released corpus contains parsed structural fields and content hashes rather than raw bundled scripts; per-skill content remains gov-erned by the upstream repository license. The malicious-misaligned portion of the Challenge Set is released only under a controlled-access data-use agreement. The corpus contains public marketplace metadata and committed repository content only; it includes no end-user telemetry, install logs, or private personal information. We’ve released the dataset on Huggingface : https://huggingface. co/datasets/anon-skillsalign-26/skill_align. Code files are hosted on: https://anonymous.4open.science/r/skill_align_anonymous_v2-C628/. 

## D Training Objectives and Algorithmic Details D.1 Two-Stage CPT Objective 

For a rendered token sequence 𝑥 1, . . . , 𝑥 𝑇 , let 𝑜 𝑡,𝑘 denote the model logit for vocabulary token 𝑘 at position 𝑡 . The next-token probability is: 

𝑝 𝜃 (𝑥 𝑡 | 𝑥 <𝑡 ) = exp (𝑜 𝑡,𝑥 𝑡 )

Í|𝑉 | 

> 𝑘 =1

exp (𝑜 𝑡,𝑘 ) . (4) The CPT loss is: 

LCPT = − 1

𝑇 

> 𝑇

∑︁ 

> 𝑡 =1

log 𝑝 𝜃 (𝑥 𝑡 | 𝑥 <𝑡 ). (5) 

Algorithm 1: Two-Stage Continued Pretraining 

Input: Pretrained LLM 𝜃 0; skill corpus D = {𝑆 𝑖 }𝑁 𝑖 =1,

𝑆 𝑖 = (𝑀 𝑖 , 𝐼 𝑖 , 𝑅 𝑖 ); step budgets 𝑇 1,𝑇 2; context budgets 

𝐶 1, 𝐶 2

Output: CPT checkpoint 𝜃 CPT  

> 1

𝜃 ← 𝜃 0; 

> 2

D𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑡 ← { Render (𝑀 𝑖 , 𝐼 𝑖 ; 𝐶 1) : 𝑆 𝑖 ∈ D} ; 

> 3

for 𝑡 = 1, . . . ,𝑇 1 do  

> 4

Sample batch B ∼ D 𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑡 ; 

> 5

LCPT ← CLMLoss (𝜃 ; B) ; 

> 6

𝜃 ← OptimizerStep (𝜃, ∇𝜃 LCPT ); 

> 7

D𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙 ← { Render (𝑀 𝑖 , 𝐼 𝑖 , 𝑅 𝑖 ; 𝐶 2) : 𝑆 𝑖 ∈ D} ; 

> 8

for 𝑡 = 1, . . . ,𝑇 2 do  

> 9

Sample batch B ∼ D 𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙 ; 

> 10

LCPT ← CLMLoss (𝜃 ; B) ; 

> 11

𝜃 ← OptimizerStep (𝜃, ∇𝜃 LCPT ); 

> 12

return 𝜃 CPT ← 𝜃 ;

## D.2 PL-HCL Objective 

Let ℎ𝜃 (𝑋 ) be the hidden representation produced by the CPT-adapted model for layer 𝑋 ∈ { 𝑀, 𝐼, 𝑅 }, and let 𝑔 𝜙 be a projection head. The projected layer embedding is: 

z𝑋 = 𝑔 𝜙 (ℎ𝜃 (𝑋 )) ∥𝑔 𝜙 (ℎ𝜃 (𝑋 ))∥ 2

. (6) For a package 𝑆 = (𝑀, 𝐼, 𝑅 ), the cross-layer score is: 

𝑎 𝜃,𝜙 (𝑆 ) = 𝛼 𝑀𝐼 sim (z𝑀 , z𝐼 ) + 𝛼 𝑀𝑅 sim (z𝑀 , z𝑅 ) + 𝛼 𝐼𝑅 sim (z𝐼 , z𝑅 ), (7) where sim (· , ·) is cosine similarity and 𝛼 𝑀𝐼 + 𝛼 𝑀𝑅 + 𝛼 𝐼𝑅 = 1.The PL-HCL loss is: 

LPL -HCL = −∑︁ 

> 𝑖

log exp (𝑎 𝜃,𝜙 (𝑃 𝑖 )/ 𝜏 )

𝐷 𝑖 

,𝐷 𝑖 = exp (𝑎 𝜃,𝜙 (𝑃 𝑖 )/ 𝜏 ) + exp (𝑎 𝜃,𝜙 (𝑁 𝐴 𝑖 )/ 𝜏 )+ I𝐵 𝑖 exp (𝑎 𝜃,𝜙 (𝑁 𝐵 𝑖 )/ 𝜏 ).

(8) where 𝜏 is the temperature and I𝐵 𝑖 indicates whether a corruption negative is sampled for 𝑆 𝑖 .

Algorithm 2: Progressive Loading-Aware Hierarchical Contrastive Learning 

Input: CPT checkpoint 𝜃 CPT ; skill corpus D; projection head 𝑔 𝜙 ; layer weights 𝛼 𝑀𝐼 , 𝛼 𝑀𝑅 , 𝛼 𝐼𝑅 ; temperature 𝜏 ;step budget 𝑇 ; corruption rate 𝜌 

Output: PL-HCL checkpoint 𝜃 PL -HCL  

> 1

(𝜃, 𝜙 ) ← ( 𝜃 CPT , 𝜙 0); 

> 2

for 𝑡 = 1, . . . ,𝑇 do  

> 3

Sample batch B = {𝑆 𝑖 }𝐵 𝑖 =1 ∼ D , where 𝑆 𝑖 = (𝑀 𝑖 , 𝐼 𝑖 , 𝑅 𝑖 ); 

> 4

foreach 𝑆 𝑖 ∈ B do  

> 5

𝑃 𝑖 ← ( 𝑀 𝑖 , 𝐼 𝑖 , 𝑅 𝑖 ); 

> 6

Sample 𝑗 ≠ 𝑖 ; 

> 7

𝑁 𝐴 𝑖 ← ( 𝑀 𝑗 , 𝐼 𝑖 , 𝑅 𝑖 ); 

> 8

if 𝑢 𝑖 ∼ Uniform (0, 1) < 𝜌 then  

> 9

e𝑀 𝑖 ← Corrupt (𝑀 𝑖 ; 𝐼 𝑖 , 𝑅 𝑖 ); 

> 10

𝑁 𝐵 𝑖 ← ( e𝑀 𝑖 , 𝐼 𝑖 , 𝑅 𝑖 ); 

> 11

Encode layer embeddings using Eq. (6);  

> 12

Compute cross-layer scores using Eq. (7);  

> 13

LPL -HCL ← ContrastiveLoss (B) ; 

> 14

(𝜃, 𝜙 ) ← OptimizerStep (( 𝜃, 𝜙 ), ∇L PL -HCL ); 

> 15

return 𝜃 PL -HCL ← 𝜃 ;

## D.3 Training Data Splits 

Table 5 reports the train, validation, and test examples actually con-sumed during CPT, PL-HCL, and intrinsic evaluation after applying the 25% per-split subsampling used for compute feasibility. Table 6 reports the corresponding whole-corpus and anchor-package ac-counting. CPT rows report sampled skill examples, while PL-HCL rows report sampled contrastive examples generated from the corre-sponding T1/T2/T3 pools. The Challenge Set is test-only, excluded from all CPT and PL-HCL training stages, and used only for the main extrinsic evaluation. 

## E Training Hyperparameters and Compute 

Table 7 lists the hyperparameters used for the two pretraining phases. Values were held fixed across the two reference backbones unless otherwise noted. Cross-Layer Misalignment Detection in Agent Skills: A Progressive Loading-Aware Contrastive Learning Approach 

Compute. Each reference backbone was pretrained on a 2× NVIDIA H200 node using bf16 mixed precision and data parallelism. The full two-stage CPT and PL-HCL pipeline required approximately 48 H200-hours per backbone, and the Challenge Set evaluation was completed in under 2 H200-hours.                                   

> Hyperparameter Full-CPT PL-HCL
> Context length 4,096 / 10,240 4,096 / 10,240 Optimizer AdamW AdamW Peak learning rate 2×10 −51×10 −5
> Schedule cosine, 3% warmup cosine, 3% warmup Effective batch size 64 sequences 32 anchors ×5 views Weight decay 0.1 0.1 Precision bf16 bf16 Gradient clipping 1.0 1.0 Temperature 𝜏 —0.07 Layer weights 𝛼 ℓ—(1/3,1/3,1/3)
> Pair-kind weights —1.0 : 1.5 : 1.0 Type-B corruption rate —0.5 / 0.3 / 0.2 Epochs 11

Table 7: Training hyperparameters for Full-CPT and PL-HCL. Context lengths and corruption rates correspond to the two-stage training schedule. 

## F Intrinsic Evaluation 

We run two intrinsic diagnostics to verify that the pretrained back-bones learn the intermediate objectives used in PL-HCL. First, next-token prediction (NTP) on held-out skill text assesses whether CPT improves the modeling of Agent Skill packages. Second, the held-out PL-HCL contrastive evaluation assesses whether the model separates aligned pairs from constructed swap and corruption neg-atives. These diagnostics support the main results in §5: CPT im-proves skill-text modeling, and PL-HCL learns the contrastive ob-jective, while extrinsic misalignment detection remains the primary evaluation. 

1. Next-Token Prediction: Table 8 reports NTP metrics before and after CPT. For both full-pipeline backbones, CPT Sub-stage 2 enhances final held-out skill-text metrics, reducing perplexity and boosting top-1 accuracy. 

2. PL-HCL Contrastive Objective: Table 9 reports held-out PL-HCL performance by sub-stage and pair kind. The pair-kind decomposition shows that corrupted type-B pairs are more difficult than swapped type-A pairs, particularly for Foundation-Sec-8B-R, while Llama-3.1-8B performs strongly across all pair types. 

## G Supplementary Results of Full Evaluation 

Table 10 reports supplementary per-class metrics and confusion counts for the Challenge Set evaluation. These metrics complement the macro-F1 results reported in §5. Because the Challenge Set is class-imbalanced, aligned-class performance alone can obscure failures on the misaligned class. We therefore report precision and recall for both classes, together with confusion counts using aligned as the positive class. Under this convention, false positives aligned 

correspond to missed misaligned skills, while true negatives aligned 

correspond to correctly detected misaligned skills. Chengjun Zhang, Yang Gao, Jianna Hur, Jingjing Zhang, and Sagar Samtani 

Sub-stage Component Train Val Test 

CPT 

Sub-stage 1 (4,096 tok) Skill [metadata + instruction] 24,190 3,014 2,998 Sub-stage 2 (10,240 tok) Skill [full package] 9,106 1,170 1,128 

PL-HCL Sub-stage 1 (4,096 tok) [metadata + instruction] 

Positive pairs 24,315 2,968 2,966 Swap negatives 96,831 11,953 11,923 Corruption negatives 83,293 10,573 10,455 

Total 204,439 25,494 25,344 

PL-HCL Sub-stage 2 (10,240 tok) [full package] 

Positive pairs 45,881 5,773 5,532 Swap negatives 161,302 20,792 20,118 Corruption negatives 64,679 8,369 8,051 

Total 271,862 34,934 33,701 

Challenge Set (test-only) 

Aligned / SAFE — — 685 Aligned / SUSPICIOUS — — 252 Aligned / MALICIOUS — — 213 Misaligned / SAFE — — 196 Misaligned / SUSPICIOUS — — 38 Misaligned / MALICIOUS — — 60 

Total — — 1,444 

Table 5: Training and evaluation data counts. Corruption negatives aggregate the T3a/T3b/T3c variants. CPT and PL-HCL counts report the examples actually consumed during training and intrinsic evaluation after applying the 25% per-split subsampling used for compute feasibility. Sequence-length budgets of 4,096 and 10,240 tokens were enforced at dataset-build time. The Challenge Set is used only for extrinsic evaluation. For the Challenge Set, alignment and maliciousness are treated as separate label axes; a skill can be aligned while still being suspicious or malicious if its surface claims accurately disclose the underlying behavior. 

Train Val Test Unseen 

Whole corpus (skill packages) 

Collected + normalized corpus 264,937 After package-size filter ( ≤256K chars) 262,041 Challenge Set (human-reviewed, held out) 1,444 

Anchor packages — Sub-stage 1 (metadata + instruction, ≤4,096 tok) 

Anchors in split (= CPT rows; T1/T2 cover all) 96,762 12,058 11,992 120,832 with T3a behavior rewrite 96,371 12,021 11,948 —with T3b donor span swap 96,316 12,012 11,935 120,303 with T3c hallucinated identifiers 47,020 5,898 5,874 —

Anchor packages — Sub-stage 2 (full package, ≤10,240 tok) 

Anchors in split (= CPT rows; T1/T2 cover all) 36,427 4,680 4,514 45,117 with T3a behavior rewrite 36,421 4,678 4,513 —with T3b donor span swap 36,417 4,677 4,512 45,105 with T3c hallucinated identifiers 28,629 3,647 3,556 —

Table 6: Whole-corpus and anchor-package accounting. Anchor counts denote distinct original skill packages that contribute at least one pair of the given type to the PL-HCL pool. Donors for swap/splice negatives are drawn within-pool, so the unseen pool is isolated from training. T3a excludes a small number of anchors whose rewrites were rejected or exceeded the token budget; T3c covers only anchors with substitutable real identifiers. Sub-stage 1 and Sub-stage 2 are materialized separately and partially overlap, rather than being cumulative. Cross-Layer Misalignment Detection in Agent Skills: A Progressive Loading-Aware Contrastive Learning Approach 

Backbone Stage Loss ↓ ppl word ↓ Top-1 ↑ Top-5 ↑ Top-𝑝 =0.95 ↑ BPB ↓

Foundation-Sec-8B-R base 1.188 10.679 0.725 0.886 0.959 0.426 + CPT sub-stg 1 1.402 13.127 0.678 0.861 0.971 0.485 + CPT sub-stg 2 1.164 8.904 0.727 0.890 0.973 0.390 

Llama-3.1-8B base 1.240 11.849 0.718 0.877 0.968 0.444 + CPT sub-stg 1 1.420 13.560 0.677 0.859 0.973 0.491 + CPT sub-stg 2 1.186 9.284 0.724 0.887 0.975 0.397 

Qwen-3-8B base 1.268 12.941 0.733 0.889 0.918 0.460 RedSage-Qwen3-8B-DPO base 1.160 10.398 0.731 0.887 0.956 0.421 WhiteRabbitNeo-2-8B base 1.181 10.524 0.726 0.884 0.971 0.423 

Table 8: Intrinsic next-token-prediction metrics on held-out skill text. ppl word denotes word-level perplexity and BPB denotes bits-per-byte. Bold rows indicate the final post-CPT checkpoint. 

Backbone Stage Split Acc F1 Gap 

FS-8B-R sub-1 test 0.830 0.578 0.548 val 0.829 0.574 0.549 sub-2 test 0.867 0.708 0.629 val 0.863 0.703 0.623 Qwen-3-8B sub-1 test 0.994 0.976 0.993 val 0.995 0.980 0.994 Llama-3.1-8B sub-1 test 0.995 0.977 0.993 val 0.995 0.978 0.994 sub-2 test 0.986 0.959 0.979 val 0.984 0.955 0.977 

(a) By PL-HCL sub-stage. Backbone Stage Pair kind 𝑛 Acc 

FS-8B-R sub-1 positive 2,966 0.994 swapped 11,923 0.994 corrupted 10,455 0.597 sub-2 positive 5,332 0.984 swapped 20,118 0.940 corrupted 8,051 0.602 Llama-3.1-8B sub-1 positive 2,966 1.000 swapped 11,923 0.998 corrupted 10,455 0.989 sub-2 positive 5,332 0.996 swapped 20,118 0.992 corrupted 8,051 0.964 

(b) By pair kind. 

Table 9: Held-out PL-HCL objective by sub-stage and pair kind. Positive pairs are expected to score high, while swapped and corrupted pairs are expected to score low. Gap denotes the positive mean probability minus the negative mean probability. Chengjun Zhang, Yang Gao, Jianna Hur, Jingjing Zhang, and Sagar Samtani 

Model Adapter 𝑘 Prec 𝑎 Rec 𝑎 Prec 𝑚 Rec 𝑚 Missed 𝑚 Detected 𝑚 

Llama-3.1-8B raw 0 0.797 0.989 0.278 0.017 289 5Llama-3.1-8B CPT-only 0 0.807 0.993 0.750 0.071 273 21 Llama-3.1-8B CPT+HCL 0 0.856 1.000 1.000 0.344 193 101 Llama-3.1-8B raw 2 0.809 0.999 0.958 0.078 271 23 Llama-3.1-8B CPT-only 2 0.809 1.000 1.000 0.078 271 23 Llama-3.1-8B CPT+HCL 2 0.918 1.000 1.000 0.650 103 191 Llama-3.1-8B raw 5 0.797 1.000 1.000 0.003 293 1Llama-3.1-8B CPT-only 5 0.805 1.000 1.000 0.051 279 15 Llama-3.1-8B CPT+HCL 5 0.915 1.000 1.000 0.636 107 187 Foundation-Sec-8B raw 0 0.797 0.989 0.235 0.014 290 4Foundation-Sec-8B CPT-only 0 0.807 0.990 0.647 0.075 272 22 Foundation-Sec-8B CPT+HCL 0 0.877 1.000 1.000 0.452 161 133 Foundation-Sec-8B raw 2 0.809 0.997 0.852 0.078 271 23 Foundation-Sec-8B CPT-only 2 0.810 0.998 0.923 0.082 270 24 Foundation-Sec-8B CPT+HCL 2 0.927 1.000 1.000 0.690 91 203 Foundation-Sec-8B raw 5 0.797 0.995 0.250 0.007 292 2Foundation-Sec-8B CPT-only 5 0.803 0.997 0.750 0.041 282 12 Foundation-Sec-8B CPT+HCL 5 0.925 1.000 1.000 0.684 93 201 WhiteRabbitNeo-2-8B raw 0 0.797 0.990 0.267 0.014 290 4WhiteRabbitNeo-2-8B raw 2 0.805 0.994 0.708 0.058 277 17 WhiteRabbitNeo-2-8B raw 5 0.805 0.997 0.857 0.061 276 18 RedSage-Qwen3-8B-DPO raw 0 0.801 0.997 0.750 0.031 285 9RedSage-Qwen3-8B-DPO raw 2 0.808 0.997 0.875 0.071 273 21 RedSage-Qwen3-8B-DPO raw 5 0.809 0.998 0.920 0.078 271 23 Qwen-3-8B raw 0 0.800 0.997 0.727 0.027 286 8Qwen-3-8B raw 2 0.809 0.997 0.889 0.082 270 24 Qwen-3-8B raw 5 0.809 0.996 0.821 0.078 271 23 

Table 10: Supplementary per-class metrics and misalignment counts on the Challenge Set. Prec 𝑎 and Rec 𝑎 denote aligned-class precision and recall; Prec 𝑚 and Rec 𝑚 denote misaligned-class precision and recall. Missed 𝑚 denotes misaligned skills incorrectly predicted as aligned; Detected 𝑚 denotes misaligned skills correctly predicted as misaligned.